---
date: 2014-03-19
title: My favourite comedians and funnymen
description: My favourite comedians and funnymen
author: Chris Done
tags: comedy
---

Here's a list of my favourite comedians in alphabetical order. It's a
disparate mix of people who have either made me giggle until I cried,
or that tickled me with clever bits, or made me see the world a little
bit differently and I thought they were something special. They're all
appealing in different ways. In all cases, I come back to their sets
fairly often. It's mostly a mix of American and British comedians.

I'll be filling out the descriptions and adding more people as and
when I get the time.

## Armando Ianucci

TBA.

## Bill Bailey

A English comedian, his self-described part-troll part-hippy
appearance, gait and old-woodland-in-olde-England-tale-like jokes and
stream-of-consciousness and geeky absurdist ramblings combined with
down to earth London speech has tickled me to the point of tears. His
musical talent is also used fantastically well. I tend to groan when
comedians try to combine music with their comedy, but for Bill it's
understated rather than taking centerstage. He's mostly clean, liberal
and generally insightful, and very English. A YouTube sample of his
comedy can be seen on his, in my opinion, best stand-up gig,
[Part Troll](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ggOa9aSG-Ow).

## Bill Burr

In stark contrast to the previous Bill, an expletive sweary
confessional-style American comedian with unsavoury views on women and
an unhealthy preoccupation with sports, all that I can forgive for his
delivery and Boston-area accent and quips. What I like most about Bill
is the way he expresses himself, his impressions and delivery. He's
also a great raconteur. He walks the line between going too far with
his contrarian views and reigning them in, often skipping over the
line. But sometimes there's some insight in all that ignorance and
anger. A YouTube sample, demonstrating all I've described, can be
found here [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AlvvCYUDHrQ).

## Billy Connolly

Billy is a raspy-voiced Scottish comedian who's made me cry laughing
many times. He is an outstanding raconteur. One of if not the best. He
can tell anecdotes all day. Even the most mundane event when told by
him has a funny streak to it. He started out telling jokes, but
quickly his comedy became about his wacky views, his great stories and
observations. His stories wind and go in and out of digressions like
silly string. Very expletive and vulgar, coming from the docks of
Glasgow, after all, but in a good way. Very Scottish, too! He's also
one to openly talk about how much he likes other comedians during his
show, which is quite rare among top stand-up comedians, because he
joyfuly celebrates all things funny. A YouTube sample of his
funny-and-serious comedy can be found
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kj7PP1UZ7k8&t=2m39s),
time-skipped to the start of an anecdote.

## Bill Hicks

Bill Hicks was an American comedian who was incredibly passionate
about his work, his views and his material. He was loud, aggressive,
shouty, animated, in-your-face and entirely sincere. His comedy was
always rooted in insight, whether political, religious or
personal. Often his material was politically topical, and
philosophical. I've cried laughing at some of his material, and looked
on in awe at his sweating expressive rage with other material. It's
hard to over-state the strength of his convictions in his stand-up and
interviews. Despite all his ranting and dismay at hypocrisy he
perceived in the world, in the end his act always had a positive
message. I've never seen another comedian like him. His whole shows
can be found on YouTube now. The best demonstration of his
don't-know-wether-to-laugh-or-serious is
[his bit on music of the time](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xRkA6zugNMQ).

## Chris Morris

Chris Morris is an English satirist best known for his programme Brass
Eye in the 90's. It's frankly an oustanding and overlooked piece of
work, and his other work, including many shorts that you can find on
YouTube, are just wonderful. Everything he has done has been bitingly
satirical, ironic, absurd and hilariously clever. From mocking the
public media of the time and their representations of drug culture,
crime, the pedophile witch hunts of the early 2000's, of perceptions
of gay people and AIDS, to absurd scenes and tickling puns. Very
British in humour, if there is such a categorization. Many people
(including most Brits) simply don't “get it”. Most if not all of the
"guest" stars on his show were unaware of being shown up with false
charities and organizations and being made to say ridiculous things,
without even questioning it. It's hard to describe without going into
more paragraphs how stuningly good and unique Morris's work is. A
sample of Brass Eye can be found on YouTube
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mPrCsfd1E64).

## Eddie Izzard

TBA.

## Eddie Murphy

TBA.

## Karl Pilkington

TBA.

## Louis CK

TBA.

## Lee Evans

TBA.

## Noel Fielding

TBA.

## Patrice O'Neal

TBA.

## Peter Kay

TBA.

## Peter Cook

TBA.

## Peter Sellars

TBA.

## Ricky Gervais

TBA.

## Steven Wright

TBA.

## Stewart Lee

TBA.

## Tim Vine

TBA.
