---
date: 2012-03-11
title: Thoughts on an interview with RMS
author: Chris Done
tags: rms, fsf, podcast
---

I just watched a live interview with Richard Stallman [by Bryan
Lunduke and Chris Fisher](http://www.jupiterbroadcasting.com/). It was
reprehensible. The format was as follows: there is live video footage
of the two interviewers, Stallman's voice can be heard from the other
side of the world, and below was the chat room dedicated to this
interview filled with just over a hundred people.

Throughout the show both interviewers failed to demonstrate a solid
understanding of the subject matter they were discussing. Stallman
repeatedly corrected them on factual matters. While disappointing,
this is okay as their ignorance makes them a good representation of
the audience, and it's those people who should be listening to a
Stallman interview.

At many points it was clear that both interviewers were unfamiliar
with the basic principles of the FSF, such as that it is unethical to
restrict people's freedom to use software. Further, Bryan Lunduke
noticeably strongly disagreed with, and failed to understand, this
basic principle.

He asked questions such as, how do game developers, like himself, make
a living without making proprietary software? Stallman replied with a
stock statement that such a job is unethical and that he should do
something else, and further elaborated that there are lots of jobs
writing custom software for clients, and that those clients, if
they're not stupid, will demand the source code.

Lunduke further pursued this line of argument, observing that in this
generation, everybody is working in such a model. Stallman rightly
addressed this by saying that because it's what everybody's doing
right now it doesn't mean it's right or that you should follow it.

As this discussion became more heated, at least on Lunduke's side, who
seemed unable to comprehend the idea that writing restricted software
can be unethical, Lunduke pulled an appeal to emotion and said that
his job puts food on the table for his children. Stallman repeated
that there are lots of other jobs to take, and wished him well, “I
hope you find a job writing custom software”. He put things in
perspective by saying that half of America are jobless or working jobs
they don't want to.

Lunduke pressed on and stooped lower, asking whether Stallman would
prefer that his daughter starve than for him to write unethical
software. Stallman replied that yes, personal plights don't excuse
unethical behaviour. Stressing again that “you don't have to be a
programmer to make money”. Lunduke, visibly offended on camera,
continued and asked Stallman whether he has any children of his own.

This set Stallman off in a tangent about overpopulation problems, but
essentially the interview had ended here after Lunduke's
misconduct. The heated line of discussion should have ended a lot
earlier, as Stallman himself had suggested, that they were “retreading
the same ground.” However, it continued, as above and Lunduke has
embarrassed himself.

After the interview, after Stallman had hung up, while Fisher appeared
to understatedly and inarticulately agree with Stallman, Lunduke
continued his unprofessionalism, calling Stallman a “crackpot”,
“crazy” and that “Stallman wants my daughter to starve,” confirming
that he completely missed the point of the whole discussion and of the
FSF. Fisher was the one who finally stopped the interview too late.

Stallman was rigorous and consistent throughout, even leading the
interview in many places. His approach could be more elaborate and
flexible, but such is the difficulty of maintaining correctness in
what you say. I was impressed that he didn't become riled up.

Of course, great minds discuss ideas, average minds discuss events,
and small minds discuss people. So, after, doing the latter two, I'll
finish on the ideas. I've finished calling out Fisher and Lunduke on
their misconduct, everyone makes mistakes and I hope next time they'll
do better.

This interview, and the reactions in the chat below it, demonstrates
that a great many people, developers in particular, even those in the
public eye who are supposed to be well versed in such matters, really
don't have a clue about the FSF and what it stands for. I will do my
best to educate people who ask me about it.
