---
date: 2012-09-15
title: Movies at Let's Movie
author: Chris Done
tags: movies
---

There is a movie club called [Let's Movie](http://letsmovie.it) which
I attend sometimes and watch movies in Italian (dubbed, naturally) at
one of the local cinemas. Some movies I saw recently are as follows.

## Le Premier Homme

This was a movie about the war and cultural segregation of the local
arabic and French occupation at the time in Algeria. It's also a
semi-autobiographical story by Albert Camus. As always, I didn't
understand much of it, due to being in Italian, but I gathered a
strong emphasis on childhood and love for his mother. I don't have
much to say about it. It didn't make a strong impression on me, I
expect half because of the language barrier, and half because the
story was not particularly familiar to me.

## Quijote

This was a movie by Mimmo Paladino, an Italian director. It had no
narrative or particular themes, more of an artistic movie that
referenced other more original artwork than itself. I think the
audience enjoyed it rather a lot more than me. Again, the language
barrier means anything that is said is completely lost on me, and I
haven't read Don Quixote. I will read it, as it is cited as one of the
greatest works of fiction ever written. But the movie itself didn't
move me particularly. It was very pretty, though. There was a nice
shot of a Tower of Babel, but all in all, I found it difficult to be
particularly moved by or interested in an array of unrelated scenes of
references to horses and artwork. That said, I would watch it
again. This brings me nicely onto the next movie…

## ลุงบุญมีระลึกชาติ (Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives)

I didn't watch this at Let's Movie, but anyway, it's related. A Thai
art movie about a man who is ill, soon to die, who then contemplates
his past lives. I wasn't impressed or moved by the movie, but I
enjoyed watching it. Again, like Quijote, it's nice to see artistic
references and watch an array of random scenes, but little more than
that. Particularly nice was a reference to the Zen story of the bull
that escapes its master, runs away, and then comes back to its master,
realizing it does not know what to do or have anywhere to go. This
reminds me of Zhuangzi's treatment of uselessness. The bull's life is
being used, put it back in the forest and it does not know how to be
useless. In summary, I'm glad I watched it, I might even watch it
again.

## Bed Time

This movie was pretty good. Better than expected. It's about a guy,
César, who is so miserable that his mission in life is to wipe the
smile off the face of a pretty, happy woman who lives in the apartment
block that he manages (and has the keys for). What's great about this
movie is that César is both an antagonist and a protagonist, in the
sense that we feel sorry for him, and don't want him to get caught
doing the terrible acts that he does, and yet we know he is a bad
person and should not be excused for the sick things he does. Also, in
the end, he wins. The bad guy comes out on top. A realistic
ending. Just like 1984. I loved it.

## I giorni della vendemmia

An all-Italian movie, this movie was very slow and deliberate, with
very little content, but intentionally simple, and pleasant. It was
a typical hormonal-boy-meets-girl story, with patient, relaxed camera
shots of dull farm work and sweltering fields and sweaty bodies. Boy
does meet girl, infatuation ensues. In particular, the surrounding
culture is an isolated catholic village—well, not even a village; set
of streets. The boy's older brother returns and there is a very well
done treatment of the subject of the alpha-beta male relationship. His
older brother is an alpha male, attractive, confident, funny, and
immediately the boy and the girl know that such tension has
started. It is natural for the girl to be smitten by such a guy, and
forget about the boy. The inevitable scene occurs, but it later turns
out that the older brother is gay, and in love with a friend who comes
to pick him up. I felt that this cheapened the alpha-beta-male tension
story, which had a refreshingly realistic approach: the beta male lost
out. However, and I suppose this topic is worth giving some coverage
too, if only a little, the point was that the older brother was gay in
a catholic family and that this is still a big deal. Gay isolation is
a well-trodden topic, but okay, feel free. All in all, it was good. A
little depressing, but good.

## Bella Addormentata

Another Italian movie by Marco Bellocchio. Upfront I will say I
understood very little of this movie, as the best parts of this movie
were subtle pieces of comedy that I could not understand. It's not
very enjoyable to be in a room full of laughing people and not know
the joke. One story, at the end, of a woman who wanted to die, against
a doctor who would not let her, was rather touching and hopeful. In
the end, with him at her bedside, sleeping, she got up, walked towards
the window, opened it, and stopped. She turned back, and did a cute
gesture, removed his shoes, and got back into bed. I thought the whole
scene was perfect. I wish I had seen the movie in English because I
think I would've enjoyed it a lot more, but alas, such is the
isolation of living here. One day my Italian will be up to scratch.
