---
date: 2014-01-19
title: Musings on philosophy
description: Musings on philosophy
author: Chris Done
tags: philosophy
---

I tend not to write anything on philosophy because I tend not to have
any original thoughts that haven't been discussed ad naseum since the
dawn of man. However, I thought that I would start writing on my general
position, the parts of philosophy that interest me, and that appeal to
my sensibilities and experience. In this instance, I cover theism and the
oneness of everything.

I don't believe in an Abrahamic god.[^4] I don't have
faith in an Abrahamic god. The question itself is not interesting to
me, now that I am not a child, nor do I designate any weight to
Pascal's wager,[^1] owing partly to the theoretical articulation of
Bertrand Russell's teapot.[^2] Due to Parkinson's Law of
Trivality,[^3] and western religious entrenchment, the topic of the
monotheistic, patriarchal, king-of-the-universe, god takes the lion's
share of amateur debate and writing of the whole Venn diagram of
philosophical discourse. It is as uninteresting as it is popular and
I'm glad to dispose of it in this paragraph.

Essentially, my approach and outlook on life is an existential one,
or, what I'd dub, “positive nihilism”. I don't believe that there is
absolute truth, purpose or meaning to anything, nor do I wish I
did. On the other hand, contrary to the general impression of
nihilism, I believe that I define what's important or meaningful to me
by my own choosing, and that is existentialism. I balance this
playfully with the anti-rationalist approach that life is better lived
and experience than conceptualised[^5]. Generally speaking, I will
take what I like and what works for me, and discard the rest.

Now that I've described the general nexus parameters from which I'm
coming at philosophy, will I say that my previous paragraph follows
nicely onto a general theme that I see and that appeals to me across
the board in philosophy, which is the notion of oneness, of energy and
action and fluidity and cyclism and flow and play and relativism, as
opposed to things, solidity, identity, ego, absolutism, idolitry,
certainty.

Even in Christian literature there is the notion of the Cloud of
Unknowing[^6], an anonymous work of Christian mysticism from the 14th
century, which claims that an image of god gets in the way of the real
thing. An image can only ever be something imposed by your own
experience, and that is something that is filtered and distorted.

The same theme comes from practically atheist circles of the 60's LSD
movement, with trippers like Timothy Leary popularizing the notion of
ego-death, that the drug-enabled crumbling of the self, which is a
walled garden in one small patch of reality, and that direct
experience of reality is one that very profoundly indicates a
continuous, unbroken oneness of all things.

Aldous Huxley, more eloquently, has written The Doors of Perception,
and finally Island, his novel-come-treatise on his interpretation of
the Vedanta and its complementary relationship with shamanic drugs
like Mescaline. In Island, Huxley takes his protagonist on a trip that
transcends Nirvana—his mind evaporating into the ether—to here-and-now
consciousness, that one should not merely disappear into bliss, but
experience reality as directly as possible.[^7][^8]

As popularly known, Buddhist meditation is predicated upon the
assumption that through focus and mindfulness one can break down the
barrier of me-ness and the self, at least temporarily, to experience
reality through a direct feed, it is said, “not thinking, analyzing,
just observing.” Something which is very hard to do; to observe
anything without attaching inherent meaning. This is called the
“unconditioned state.”[^9]

There is also a scientific angle, which is that the universe evolved
the human brain in order to observe itself. In other words, we _are_
the universe, looking at itself. We aren't some separate entities, we
are the universe, reflecting upon the nature of itself. It's not, me
and the universe, it's: me, the universe. In this sense, if there is a
so-called “energy force” god, some “necessary being” which exists as
merely some quantum effect, or string configuration, we are it.

Finally, speaking from personal experience, I have once experienced a
glimpse of what I would consider related. It was early in the morning,
around four, and I went for a walk. The sun had not started rising,
and I was walking past some trees in a small woods. In this brief
period of ten minutes from the start of the road to the end, a
lifetime of contemplation about nothing occurred. I suddenly noticed
the shape of the trees. I'd seen trees my whole life, but this time, I
saw them for the first time. Like a baby sees the world. I saw the
amazing fractal shape of the branches reaching out across the sky. I
felt nothing but joy and love and hope for the whole world and the
future in this moment where I thought of nothing and marveled at
existence.

In the same way, I related this to a friend some time afterwards, and
he recounted a story to me in which he'd been out for the night, and
came home to find that he was locked out of the house. So he went to
his car and sat in the back seat. He said that it was probably the
best night of his life. I asked why, and what did he do? And he
replied that he did absolutely nothing, he simply sat there, in
absolute wonder and contentment, at his situation and surroundings. I
understood this completely. The typical state of waking human moments
is dissatisfaction, of discontent; suffering. To escape this, even
briefly, is a gift.

I sometimes wonder whether this kind of experience has happened to
most people and whether most would understand this brief encounter
with bliss, whatever shape it takes, and even for a few minutes. In
closing, I give a lot of weight to the notion of the oneness of
everything. It'll probably crop up in future writings, which will deal
on a less grand scale and more on personal, interpersonal, and societal
grounds.

[^1]: “Given the possibility that God actually does exist and assuming
the infinite gain or loss associated with belief in God or with
unbelief, a rational person should live as though God exists and seek
to believe in God. If God does not actually exist, such a person will
have only a finite loss (some pleasures, luxury, etc.).”
[Pascal's Wager](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal%27s_Wager)

[^2]: “I ought to call myself an agnostic; but, for all practical
purposes, I am an atheist. I do not think the existence of the
Christian God any more probable than the existence of the Gods of
Olympus or Valhalla. To take another illustration: nobody can prove
that there is not between the Earth and Mars a china teapot revolving
in an elliptical orbit, but nobody thinks this sufficiently likely to
be taken into account in practice. I think the Christian God just as
unlikely.” [Russell's teapot](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russell%27s_teapot)

[^3]: “The time spent on any item of the agenda will be in inverse
proportion to the sum [of money] involved." A reactor is used because
it is so vastly expensive and complicated that an average person
cannot understand it, so one assumes that those that work on it
understand it. On the other hand, everyone can visualize a cheap,
simple bicycle shed, so planning one can result in endless discussions
because everyone involved wants to add a touch and show personal
contribution.
[Parkinson's law of triviality](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parkinson%27s_law_of_triviality)

[^4]: That's an intentional lower-case. The practice of upper-casing
“god” is an embellishing practice to which I need not adhere.

[^5]: “Life is better lived than conceptualized. This writing can be
less demanding should I allow myself to indulge in the usual
manipulating game of role creation. Fortunately for me, my
self-knowledge has transcended that and I've come to understand that
life is best to be lived — not to be conceptualized. If you have to
think, you still do not understand.” — Bruce Lee

[^6]: “The highest form of contemplative prayer, was that in which all
concept of god has been left behind. And this is the surpeme act of
faith. So that you no longer need an image, because this gets in the
way of reality.” — Alan Watts

[^7]: “If you're a Tantrik, you don't renounce the world or deny its value;
you don't try to escape into a Nirvana apart from life, as the monks
of the Southern School do. No, you accept the world, and you make use
of it; you make use of everything you do, of everything that happens
to you, of all the things you see and hear and taste and touch, as so
many means to your liberation from the prison of yourself.”

[^8]: Behind his closed eyelids an ocean of luminous bliss poured
upwards like an inverted cataract. Poured upwards from union into
completer union, from impersonality into a yet more absolute
transcendence of selfhood.  "God-the-Fourteenth-of-July," he repeated
and, from the heart of the cataract, gave vent to a final chuckle of
recognition and understanding.  "What about the fifteenth of July?"
Susila questioned. "What about the morning after?"  "There isn't any
morning after."  She shook her head. "It sounds suspiciously like
Nirvana."  "What's wrong with that?"  "Pure Spirit, one hundred
percent proof—that's a drink that only the most hardened contemplation
guzzlers indulge
in. [Bodhisattvas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bodhisattva) dilute
their Nirvana with equal parts of love and work."  "This is better,"
Will insisted.  "You mean, it's more delicious. That's why it's such
an enormous temptation. The only temptation that God could succumb
to. The fruit of the ignorance of good and evil. What heavenly
lusciousness, what a supermango! God had been stuffing Him self with
it for billions of years.  Then all of a sudden, up comes Homo
sapiens, out pops the knowledge of good and evil. God had to switch to
a much less palatable brand of fruit.  You've just eaten a slice of
the original supermango, so you can sympathize with Him." —
[Island](http://www.huxley.net/island/aldoushuxley-island.html)

[^9]: “To arrive at the experiential realization of the truths it is
necessary to take up the practice of meditation.... At the climax of
such contemplation the mental eye ... shifts its focus to the
unconditioned state, Nibbana” —
[Kamalashila](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kamala%C5%9B%C4%ABla)
