---
date: 2012-04-09
title: How I spent Easter weekend
description: How I spent Easter weekend
author: Chris Done
tags: haskell, vacation, programming
---

I have recently bought a bike, so I would've gone out for another trip
around the local mountains, but it's been pretty iffy weather, I don't
feel like going out riding in the rain.

So instead I spent time at home hacking. In fact the whole three days
(friday evening to monday evening) I've spent programming and pretty
much zero relaxation. Usually I have some down-time to my workflow but
this weekend I've been hacking non-stop. My fingers are about ready to
give out on me as I write this blog.

The first thing I wrote was [bdo](https://github.com/chrisdone/bdo),
an Emacs mode, and some JavaScript, to allow me to update the CSS file
of my web site on the fly from Emacs in the browser. This gives it a
Firebug-like feel, except that the changes to the CSS is saved. This
is very nice. I started writing that because I wanted to overhaul the
theme of a web site at work. That took the better part of Saturday to
whip up.

Then, armed with this new tool, I set my sights on overhauling the
design of said web site. The problem is that a new design was created
for it, which is used for the entry page, but once logged in the old
design remains. My job was to bring the new design into the logged in
area. Fortunately my UI library and general way of working has been
strict enough that modifying the theme quite a bit was a piece of
cake. With bdo it was 10 times faster and a more pleasant experience.

In between that I took a brief break to chat a bit on IRC, and watch
the first episode of an anime that was recommended to me called Code
Geass - Lelouch of the Rebellion. I've yet to decide whether I like
the show based on the pilot. I also watched some more Twin Peaks. And
listened to some Ethics of Liberty on audiobook.

After that I decided with the new theme rolled out I would work on the
UX part, which involved creating about five new pages for different
users and different tasks. This, I think, simplified and made the
overall process more robust. So I spent most of the weekend, my
vacation, hacking on a work project. I'm not sure exactly why I spent
all my weekend working on something for free, but I think it has
something to do with pride, and wanting to make the software slicker
and more awesome.

After that I eventually got round to what I've wanted to do for a
while, which is to setup a wiki for myself, to jot ideas down that I
have. Seeing as gitit fails to understand its own config file, I am
left with a subdomain instead of a sub path, so the address is
[http://wiki.chrisdone.com/](http://wiki.chrisdone.com/). All the
pages are [here.](http://wiki.chrisdone.com/_index) Pretty much ideas
and observations I've made in the past or thought about, that I'd like
to jot down for future reference to people in conversation, and just
for the mental health aspect of writing things down in a coherent,
linked manner.

After that I took a pic of myself with my iPod, touched it up with
GIMP, and stuck it on [my homepage](http://chrisdone.com/). So I'm
there, upside down, looking down at my content. Fun.

So that's what I got up to this weekend. Now I'm going to kick back
with a bowl of cereal and watch [this talk about Haskell by
Galois](http://channel9.msdn.com/Events/Lang-NEXT/Lang-NEXT-2012/A-Means-to-Many-Ends-10-Years-of-Haskell-at-Galois).
