---
date: 2012-05-06
title: The Hunger Games (and Battle Royale)
description: The Hunger Games (and Battle Royale)
author: Chris Done
tags: movies, film, review
---

The Hunger Games left a lasting impression on me. Spoiler alert for
both The Hunger Games and Battle Royale.

The violence was as expected, and not particularly shocking, quite
tame in fact, especially when compared with its Japanese counterpart,
Battle Royale. Actually, after watching it, I found that they were in
fact, not the same, at least in execution, though the premise was
basically same.

What actually I found impressive was the “different worlds” setup of
both the highly isolated oppressed proletariat and the extremely
decadent aristocracy. It has elements of 1984 (in outside society),
The Truman Show (in the actual games part), and actually helped me
identify what I found so strange in Brazil but couldn't identify in
the past, it was the trivial lives and concerns of the
pseudo-Georgian/Roman privileged citizens living in the kind of
inner-city. Actually the talk with the great bearded leader reminded
me of a cross between Big Brother and the director from Brave New
World.

It's been said that all great civilizations collapse, and one sign of
that collapse is decadence, and creation of a Colosseum or something
like it; with entertainment of the upper classes climaxing at being
audience to battles to the death. When life, especially of others, has
become so meaningless, only this kind of entertainment will satisfy.

What was great about the upper class in Hunger Games was their
fictionalization of the suffering of others. That's the only word I
can think of to describe it. They aren't incapable of empathy, it's
that they don't feel sympathy, i.e. they're too far away, from another
world, to consider the “tributes” even human, at least their kind of
human. The television show with the interviewer who feigned compassion
for the tributes, and yet relished in it, only shows that their way of
looking at the drama of the children was as a fiction; entertainment
and entertainment alone. Katniss (and Peeta) recognized this. As does
their adviser who drinks. That's why he drinks.

That said, another ironic aspect that couldn't go unnoticed was the
irony of watching this drama unfold as a viewer of the film, feeling
and fictionalizing in my own way. In a way, we're guilty of doing what
the spectators in the film are doing. It's an interesting cognitive
dissonance. As Maximus broke the fourth wall in Gladiator, “Are you
not entertained?” The only difference is that we know it's not real,
in both cases it's vicarious, and if it were real, we'd (hopefully) be
outraged and stand up against it. I hope.

So that was the lasting impression of this movie for me. For me, this
movie is about class difference, and the long battles and violence
just an incidental plot point, and Katniss witnesses this.

This is in contrast with Battle Royale, which really is, for me, a
movie about teenagers and teenager relationships, what brings people
to be violent, and paranoia. Consider the lighthouse sequence. The
girls are trying to work together, they're trying to be grown-ups and
see it through. The relationships of the characters are stretched
throughout, but the paranoia and distrust heavily gets the better of
them in the lighthouse. The girl with the long hair who takes pleasure
in hurting people, the participants who merely chose to be in the
battle for the fun of it. Even the orchestrator of the Royale is
merely a lonely man feeling despair about life.

That's the real distinction between these two movies, for me. One is
about class/politics in which there happens to be children and
violence, and the other is about children, relationships, violence and
paranoia, in which there happens to be a political angle. And they're
both great movies.
