---
date: 2014-08-04
title: Zhuangzi on Freedom
description: Zhuangzi on Freedom
author: Chris Done
tags: philosophy, zhuangzi
---

## The Story of P’eng

In the northern darkness there is a fish and his name is K'un. The
K'un is so huge I don't know how many thousand li he measures. He
changes and becomes a bird whose name is P'eng. The back of the P'eng
measures I don't know how many thousand li across and, when he rises
up and flies off, his wings are like clouds all over the sky. When the
sea begins to move, this bird sets off for the southern darkness,
which is the Lake of Heaven.

The Universal Harmony records various wonders, and it says: "When the
P'eng journeys to the southern darkness, the waters are roiled for
three thousand li. He beats the whirlwind and rises ninety thousand
li, setting off on the sixth month gale." Wavering heat, bits of dust,
living things blowing each other about – the sky looks very blue. Is
that its real color, or is it because it is so far away and has no
end? When the bird looks down, all he sees is blue too.

If water is not piled up deep enough, it won't have the strength to
bear up a big boat. Pour a cup of water into a hollow in the floor and
bits of trash will sail on it like boats. But set the cup there and it
will stick fast, for the water is too shallow and the boat too
large. If wind is not piled up deep enough, it won't have the strength
to bear up great wings. Therefore when the P'eng rises ninety thousand
li, he must have the wind under him like that. Only then can he mount
on the back of the wind, shoulder the blue sky, and nothing can hinder
or block him. Only then can he set his eyes to the south.

**The cicada and the little dove laugh at this saying, "When we make an
effort and fly up, we can get as far as the elm or the sapanwood tree,
but sometimes we don't make it and just fall down on the ground. Now
how is anyone going to go ninety thousand li to the south!**

If you go off to the green woods nearby, you can take along food for
three meals and come back with your stomach as full as ever. If you
are going a hundred li, you must grind your grain the night before;
and if you are going a thousand li you must start getting together
provisions three months in advance. **What do these two creatures
understand?** Little understanding cannot come up to great
understanding; the short-lived cannot come up to the long-lived. …

Among the questions of T'ang to Ch'i we find the same thing. In the
bald and barren north, there is a dark sea, the Lake of Heaven. In it
is a fish which is several thousand li across, and no one knows how
long. His name is K'un. There is also a bird there, named P'eng, with
a back like Mount T'ai and wings like clouds filling the sky. He beats
the whirlwind, leaps into the air, and rises up ninety thousand li,
cutting through the clouds and mist, shouldering the blue sky, and
then he turns his eyes south and prepares to journey to the southern
darkness.

**The little quail laughs at him, saying, "Where does he think he's
going? I give a great leap and fly up, but I never get more than ten
or twelve yards before I come down fluttering among the weeds and
brambles. And that's the best kind of flying anyway! Where does he
think he's going?" Such is the difference between big and little.**

**Therefore a man who has wisdom enough to fill one office effectively,
good conduct enough to impress one community, virtue enough to please
one ruler, or talent enough to be called into service in one state,
has the same kind of self-pride as these little creatures. Sung
Jung-tzu would certainly burst out laughing at such a man. The whole
world could praise Sung Jung-tzu and it wouldn't make him exert
himself; the whole world could condemn him and it wouldn't make him
mope.**

## Extract from the story of Hsü Yu

I have no use for the rulership of the world! Though the cook may not
run his kitchen properly, the priest and the impersonator of the dead
at the sacrifice do not leap over the wine casks and sacrificial
stands and go take his place.

## Lesson

The lessons of Zhuangzi on the freedom to be yourself are related to
his treatment on usefulness. It is part of the broader scope of free
and easy wandering. These lessons are more familiar to the modern
western sensibility than his other teachings.
